---
layout: diary 
title:  "Index theorem as infinite-dimensional equivariant localization"
date:   2023-05-24 16:03:47 -0500
categories: diary
---

Today I read some of [Localization Formulas, Superconnections, and the Index Theorem for Families](https://projecteuclid.org/journals/communications-in-mathematical-physics/volume-103/issue-1/Localization-formulas-superconnections-and-the-index-theorem-for-families/cmp/1104114628.full) by J.M Bismut. It gave a new perspective on the heat kernel proof of the index theorem, which I discussed [here](https://chessapig.github.io/diary/2). In particular, it is a manfiestation of the duestermaat-heckman formula on loop space. This is informally explained in a very readible [article by Atiyah](http://www.numdam.org/article/AST_1985__131__43_0.pdf).

## Duestermaat-Heckman via gaussians

The deustermaat-heckman formula is a localization formula for equivariant cohomology. In its usual statement, it says that the equivariant cohomology for an $S^1$ action on a manifold can be computed entirely with local information around the fixed point set of the $S^1$ action. The deustermaat-heckman formula is the explict expression of equivariant cohomology classes as charecteristic classes of vector bundles over the fixed point set. Specifically, let $\omega$ is the symplectic form on a manifold $M$ of dimension $2n$, and $H$ is the hamiltonian function generating the $S^1$ function. If $X$ is the fixed point set of the $S^1$ action, then

$$\int_M e^{-tH} \frac{\omega^n}{n!} = \int_X e^{-tH}\frac{e^\omega}{\Pi (t m_i - i \alpha_i)}$$
where $m_i$ are the charecters of the $S^1$  action on the notmal bundle to $X$, and the $\alpha_i$ are charecteristic classes of the normal bundle to $X$.
 
The paper above first supplies a new proof of the localization theorem, using guassians which limit to the fixed point set. We start with an equivariantly closed form $\mu$, which is a differential form closed under a deformation of the exterior derivative that accounts for the $S^1$ action. Then, we compute the integral of the form over the whole manifold via an integral fixed point set (this is the localization formula). To derive this formula, we introduce a one form $\beta$ dual to the generating vector field $X$ of the $S^1$ action. We can take this to be an equivariantly closed form. Then, we deform 

$$\mu \to e^{s(\mathrm{d}  + \iota_X)\beta}\mu$$

and show that  the integreal remains constant over the manifold. Next, since $\beta$ is dual to $X$, $\iota_X(\beta)$ is equal to $\vert X\vert^2$. around the zero set of $X$ (the fixed point set of the $S^1$ action), this looks locally quadratic. As we limit $s\to 0$, this quadradic part is dominant, and the mass of the deformed $\mu$  concentrates around the limit set. The other part involves $\mathrm{d} \beta$, which contributes some first order terms in the limit $s \to 0$ which relate to curvature.  Computing the gaussian integral in the $s\to 0$ limit results in an integral around the zero set of $X$, involving the curvature on the normal bundle. Careful evaluation gives a formula, which agrees with that of Duestermaat-Heckman.

To summarize, we have a very renormalization-colored proof of localization. We concentrated the equivariant form around the fixed point set, in a way that preserves the total integral. Thus, we can compute cohomology from local data. This is very reminiscent of [Witten's approch to morse theory](http://personal.cimat.mx:8181/~gil/docencia/2012/teoria_de_morse/witten_supersymmetry_and_morse_theory.pdf)

## Loop spaces and index theory

Now to relate it to the index theorem. The Mckean-Singer theorem tells us that the index of the dirac operator can be computed from the supertrace of the heat kernel:
$$\text{index} D_+ = \int_M\text{sTr}( P_t(x,x)) \quad \text{where } -D^2P_t(x, \cdot) = \partial_t P_t(x, \cdot)$$
In particular, the heat kernel term asks, if we start with a spinor at $x$ and let it diffuse for time $t$, what will the spinor remaining at $x$ be? 

We can recontextualize the heat operator as diffusion. To find the heat kernel $P(x,y)$, we integrate over all possible paths (using the proper Weiner measure), and evaluate what percentage of them who start at $x$ end at $y$. To compute $P(x,x)$, we need to look at paths starting and ending at the same point, or loops. The intergal of $P(x,x)$ over all $M$ becomes an integral of the weiner measure over loop space $LM = \text{Maps}(S^1,M)$ (A path integral, in physics parlance). Specifically, we wish to evaluate

$$\int_{LM} e^{i E(\phi)} \mathrm{D}\phi$$

Where $\mathrm{D}\phi$ is the weiner measure on the loop space, and $E(\phi)$ is the energy of a loop. We wish to evaluate this integral using a formal application of the Duesteramaat-heckman formula. First, we note that $LM$ carries a natural almost symplectic structure. Let $X_E$ be the vector field generating rotation around the loops of $LM$. Using the riemannian mertic structure, we can turn this to a one form $\theta$, and define the symplectic form via $\omega = \text{d} \theta$. Next, we note that the energy function $E(\phi) = \int_{S^1} \vert \text{d}\phi \vert ^2$ is actually the Hamiltonian generating the rotation around a loop! That is, its vector field is $X_E$. The integral we want is exactly the left side of the Deustermaat-heckman  formula, on an infintie dimensional manifold.

Before we apply localization, we need to switch the masure $\cal{D}\phi$ to the louiville measure using $\omega$. The difference is the square root of the determinant of $\omega$, written as a matrix. This is undefined in infinite dimensions, but using zeta function regularization, we can make sense of something. This pffafian turns out to be the index of the dirac operator on $M$. 

Now, apply localization. The fixed point set for the "rotate around each loop" consists of the constant loops, which are just points in $M$. Thus, the set consits of $M\subset LM$,and our localization theorem transforms the path integral to an integral over $M$. The right hand side rearranges to
$$\int_M \Pi \frac{\alpha_i /2}{\sinh \alpha_i/2}$$
Which is a combination of charecteristic classes on $M$. This numer is called the $\hat{A}$-genus of $M$. 
**Applying Duestermaat-Heckman localization formula to the loop space $LM$ proves that the index of the Dirac operator is the $\hat{A}$ genus!**

In fact, this method can be applied to all elliptic operators, to prove the general index theorem. And here's the kicker: The heat kernel proof of the index theorem is *exactly* the finite dimensional proof of the localization form, summarized above, carried out in infinite dimenions. A very cool perspective on index theory!