---
layout: project
title: Stick bombs
date: 2022-11-04 16:03:47 -0500
categories: talk
tags:
  - talk
  - fun
  - craft
attributes:
  - fun-talk
image: /assets/images/sticks.jpg
file: 
talk-venue: UC Berkeley Many cheerful facts, fall 2022
summary: Weave together 4 or 5 popsicle sticks in the right way, and you get a flat rigid pattern -- until you drop it. The fast-released elastic energy shoots apart the popsicle sticks, producing a *stick bomb*. Join us as we try and discover the mathematics behind stick bombs, what makes them stay together and what makes them fall apart. Working together in groups, we'll come up with Many of our own Cheerful Facts about tounge-depresser trajectiles :)
pageHasContent: true
gallery-title: Other art
gallery-folder: /gallery/personal
---

The first week, I traced through this perspective on the simplest knot invariant, the linking number. I start from winding numbers in 2D, explained through flat connections on a line bundle. Extending to 3D, this gives gauss's integral formula for linking numbers. Then I introduce the ableian chern-simons functional integral, and show that it formally computes linking numbers. Finally, I construct this as a topological quantum field theory, giving a way to compute linking numbers from knot diagrams. 

 The second week, This week, we will instead integrate over lie algebra-valued 1-forms (nonabeilain Chern Simons theory), and show that the resulting topological invariant is the jones polynomial. To do so, we introduce the axioms of topological quantum field theory, which gives a calculate the invariant by cutting up the manifold into small pieces. This shows us how our invariant changes when resolving a crossing in a knot, reproducing the skien relations of the Jones polynomial. 

Here are some sources which I used for this talk.
- [Gauge theories, knots, and gravity](https://www.worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/2324#t=aboutBook) by Baez and Munian. See espically section 2, chapter 4 and 5 (on chern simons theory and knot invariants). I really like their exposition on linking numbers.
- [Quantum field theory and the Jones polynomial](https://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/beem/papers/jones_polynomial_witten.pdf), by Witten. The paper which introduced the connection between nonebalian chern simons theory and the jones polynomial.
- [The Geometry and Physics of Knots](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/geometry-and-physics-of-knots/AE5EDC4CA423FCD598FFB6A3D8AC72E4) by Atiyah. Very good mathematical summary of Witten's origional work, emphesizing the geometric quantization.
